# Semantic Errors Detection

## Overview
Semantic errors are not picked up by the tree-sitter parser and result in a valid CST but an invalid AST. They are detected at the stage of parsing the CST into a Rust `Model` object representing the Essence problem. The errors generated from the essence parser(link) are extracted and reported via `Diagnostics` API ([Diagnostics API documentation](https://github.com/conjure-cp/conjure-oxide/tree/main/docs/src/documentation/diagnostics_api.md)).

The semantic errors detected include type errors, omitted declarations, invalid indexing and using keywords as identifiers. 

## Implementation

`pub fn detect_semantic_errors(source: &str) -> Vec<Diagnostic>`

Calls `parse_essence_with_context` from `parse_model.rs` which parses Essence into a `Model` using the CST generated by the tree-sitter parser, converts the returned errors (`EssenceParseError`) into `Diagnostics` if they exist and accumualtes them in a `Vec<Diagnostic>`. 

`fn error_to_diagnostic(err: &crate::errors::EssenceParseError) -> Diagnostic `

The function converts an `EssenceParseError` into a `Diagnostic` by pattern-matching on the error variant. When an error includes an associated source range and message, the optional `tree_sitter::Range` is converted into two `Position` structures using `range_to_position(range)`, and a `Diagnostic` is created with this range, an error severity, "semantic error detection" as the source, and an appropriate error message. For all other error variants, a fallback `Diagnostic` is produced.

`fn range_to_position(range: &Option<tree_sitter::Range>)`

Maps an `Option<tree_sitter::Range>` to (`Position, Position`). If the range is `None` it returns `(0,0)-(0,0)`. 

### Keywords as Identifiers Check 

Tree-sitter does not report an error when an Essence keyword (e.g. `find`, `bool`) is used as an identifier, because such keywords are valid character sequences according to the grammar’s identifier token. As a result, the generated CST is valid, and this cannot be detected during syntactic error checking. To address this, an additional check is implemented during the CST-to-Model parsing stage.

```rust 
const KEYWORDS: [&str; 21] = [
    "forall", "exists", "such", "that", "letting", "find", "minimise", "maximise", "subject", "to",
    "where", "and", "or", "not", "if", "then", "else", "in", "sum", "product", "bool",
]
```

`fn keyword_as_identifier(root: tree_sitter::Node, src: &str) -> Result<(), EssenceParseError>`

Called at the end of `parse_model_with_context`. Performs this validation by traversing the CST using DFS. Starting from the root node, it iterates over all child nodes and inspects nodes of kind `variable`, `identifier`, or `parameter`. For each such node, the corresponding source text is extracted and compared against a predefined list of reserved Essence keywords. If a match is found, the function reports an `EssenceParseError` with a source range derived from the CST node and an error message. 



## Examples
### Example: Keyword `find` as an identifier 

**Input**
```text
find find,b,c: int(1..3)
```

**Diagnostic**

```text
Range: (0:5 - 0:9)
Severity: Error
Message: Semantic Error: Keyword 'find' used as identifier
Source: "semantic error detection"
``` 

### Example: Keyword `bool` as an identifier 
**Input**
```text
find bool: bool
```

**Diagnostic**
```text
Range: (0:5 - 0:9)
Severity: Error
Message: Semantic Error: Keyword 'bool' used as identifier
Source: "semantic error detection"
``` 

### Example: Omitted Declaration 

**Input**
```text
find x: int(1..10)
such that x = y
```

**Diagnostic**
```text
Range: (1:14 - 1:15)
Severity: Error
Message: Semantic Error: Undefined variable: 'y'
Source: "semantic error detection"
``` 

