[//]: # (Author: Soph Morgulchik)
[//]: # (Last Updated: 20/12/2025)
# Syntactic Errors Detection

## Overview
Syntactic errors result in an invalid **Concrete Syntax Tree (CST)** generated by Tree-sitter when parsing Essence code. An invalid CST may contain:

- **`ERROR` nodes**  
  Inserted when the parser fails to interpret a portion of the code according to the grammar.

- **`MISSING` nodes**  
  Inserted when the parser expects a token that is not present in the source.

These errors are detected by traversing the CST, classified into specific subtypes, and reported via the `Diagnostics` API ([Diagnostics API documentation](https://github.com/conjure-cp/conjure-oxide/tree/main/docs/src/documentation/diagnostics_api.md)).

## Implementaion 

`detect_syntactic_errors(source: &str) -> Vec<Diagnostic)`

Tree-sitter is used to parse the Essence source code and generate a CST. If parsing fails entirely, a corresponding Diagnostic is returned immediately. Otherwise, the CST is traversed using a `WalkDFS::with_retract` iterator. It consists of Tree-sitter's `TreeCursor` and an optional `retract`. Tree-sitter nests errors in the CST. When a node is marked as erroneous, its descendant nodes may also be marked as errors which can lead to duplicate diagnostics. Enabling `retract` avoids this by skipping the children of `ERROR` or `MISSING` nodes and collecting only top-level errors, thereby improving the clarity of the reported diagnostics.

When a node is identified as an `ERROR` node or contains missing content, the syntax error is classified and a specific `Diagnostic` is generated and pushed to a `Vec<Diagnostic>`. Each `Diagnostic` contains the `Range` of the error (start and end positions in the source code) and a tailored error message. 

In some cases, Tree-sitter fails to insert an explicit `MISSING` node. To handle this, missing tokens are additionally detected by checking whether the source range of a CST node has zero length.

### Missing Token Diagnostics
`classify_missing_token(node: Node) -> Diagnostic`

Generates diagnostics for missing tokens.

To improve error reporting, the function pattern-matches on the parent node
of the missing token and produces a more context-aware error message. Source
ranges are calculated using Tree-sitter’s `Node.start_position()` and
`Node.end_position()` APIs.

---

### Example: Missing Right-Hand Operand

**Input**
```text
find x: int
such that 5 =
```
**Diagnostic**

```text
Range: (1:13) - (1:13)
Severity: Error
Message: Missing right operand in 'comparison' expression
Source: syntactic-error-detector
``` 

### Example: Missing Parenthesis and Expression/Domain

**Input**
```text
find x: int(1..3
letting x be
```
**Diagnostics**
```text
Diagnostic 1:
Range: (0:16) - (0:16)
Severity: Error
Message: Missing ')'
Source: syntactic-error-detector

Diagnostic 2:
Range: (1:12) - (1:12)
Severity: Error
Message: Missing 'expression or domain'
Source: syntactic-error-detector

```


### Unexpected Token and Malformed Top Level Lines Diagnostics

`classify_unexpected_token_error(node: Node, source_code: &str) -> Diagnostic`

This function is called when an `ERROR` node is encountered in the CST.  

Unexpected tokens occur when Tree-sitter fails to recognise input according to the grammar rule it is currently applying. These tokens may either be valid grammar elements that are unexpected in the current context, or completely foreign symbols.  

When no rule can be applied to an entire line (often when unexpected tokens appear at the start of the line) the line is considered malformed.  

The different cases are distinguished based on the position of the `ERROR` node in the CST:

- **Parent is the root node (`program`)**:  
  - **Starting column 0**: the entire line is malformed.  
  - **Has a previous sibling**: unexpected tokens appear at the end of a line, meaning a grammar rule was successfully applied but extra tokens remain.  

- **Parent is another token node**: unexpected tokens occur inside a construct, indicating that the rule was only partially matched.

---

### Example: Unexpected token inside a construct 

**Input**
```text
find x: int(1..3)
such that x -> %9
```
**Diagnostic**

```text
Range: (1:15) - (1:16)
Severity: Error
Message: Unexpected '%' inside 'implication'
Source: syntactic-error-detector
``` 

### Example: Unexpected tokens at the end of a line
**Input**

```text 
find x, a, b: int(1..3)+x
```
**Diagnostic**
```text
Range: (0:23) - (0:25)
Severity: Error
Message: Unexpected '+x' at the end of 'find'
Source: syntactic-error-detector
```

### Example: Malformed line

**Input**

```text
find x: int(1..3)
find x
```

**Diagnostic**
```text
Range: (1:0) - (1:6)
Severity: Error
Message: Malformed line 2: 'find x'
Source: syntactic-error-detector
```







    

