[//]: # (Author: Hanaa Khan)
[//]: # (Last Updated: 21-12-25)

# Glossary

- PR: Pull request. It's a proposal to merge code changes into the [main](https://github.com/conjure-cp/conjure-oxide/tree/main) branch, and allows collaborators to review and suggest modifications before it's accepted.

- Branch: A branch contains a different history of code changes (commits). You can start a new branch A' off of any branch A and push new commits to A' without affecting the contents of A. Merging branch A' into A adds all new changes from A' to A.

- RFC: Request for Comments. It is a design proposal, often written before or alongside major changes.

- Essence: A high level constraint modelling language. Essence is _declarative_, i.e. it states the problem rather than how to solve it. It also lets us model things at the class level.

  - A class-level model (i.e. description of a problem) may have some parameters. To get from a class-level model to an instance model, we provide concrete values for all the parameters.

    The following describes a problem class:
  
    ```
    given N: int
    find x
    such that x < N
    ```

    The following are instances of that class:

    ```
    letting N be 3
    find x
    such that x < N
    ```

    ```
    letting N be 42
    find x
    such that x < N
    ```
  
- Conjure: Constraint modelling tool that translates Essence problem descriptions into Essence' models that constraint solvers can execute.  

- Essence' (Essence prime): Intermediate representation automatically generated by Conjure

- [Savile Row:](https://www-users.york.ac.uk/peter.nightingale/savilerow/) It transforms high level Essence' constraint models and outputs solver-specific model that can be executed. Written in Java.

- Minion: Constraint solver. It takes low level constraint models (like Savile Row output) and searches for solutions. Specifically, it has its own input language that is [extensively documented.](https://math.chapman.edu/~jipsen/talks/Milan2010/MinionManual09.pdf)

For an in-depth glossary of GitHub terms, see the [GitHub Docs Glossary](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/learning-about-github/github-glossary).
This [Git Cheat Sheet](https://git-scm.com/cheat-sheet) also contains resources about git commands.
